Ebola has, let's call it a family, and
there are five different strains. It's a
very dangerous virus, but it's not a
very contagious virus. It's not COVID
that you can get by sitting on the bus
with someone who has it. That's why
[music] I'm not concerned that this
would become a pandemic.
>> Peter Piot, who helped [music] identify
Ebola 50 years ago and has studied
viruses ever since.
>> Do you think that when you got COVID
yourself and got it badly, did it change
something in your own perception?
[music]
>> Yes, actually, I was scared to die. It's
a lesson in in humility and uh yeah, we
are human beings at the end of the day.
>> [music]
>> From Bloomberg Weekend, this is the
Michelle Hussein Show.
Imagine this scene, if you will, from
1976.
A group of scientists go to Central
Africa to investigate a mysterious new
virus spreading in the country that was
then known as Zaire.
One of them, Peter Piot, has already
investigated a blood sample back at his
lab in Belgium, and he's seen something
strange and unknown.
Then, at the heart of the outbreak, they
work out in days how it's being
transmitted from person to person, and
soon it has a name, Ebola, from the
nearby Ebola River. Today, the country
they visited is called the Democratic
Republic of Congo, and it's where there
is a new outbreak of Ebola.
Everyone hopes that it's not as bad as
the one in 2014, which killed more than
11,000 people in six countries,
including the United States. But, Ebola
is a frightening word, not least because
through COVID, we all now know what a
pandemic is like. So, for this episode,
I wanted really to understand this
virus, demystify it, if you like, work
out what you really need to know, how
you get Ebola, how long this outbreak
might last, what vaccines there are.
But, talking to Peter Piot is also a
journey into science and discovery in
the widest sense, because after Ebola,
he went on to become a leading figure on
HIV. And now, as he reveals, he worries,
too, about what he calls an epidemic of
misinformation.
So, I hope you get as much out of this
conversation as I did.
It begins with Peter joining me from his
home in Belgium.
It's very good to talk to you, Peter,
and I'm especially grateful for your
time, because I know you're just back
from a long trip and with many demands
on your time, given the situation in
DRC. So, thank you, most importantly.
>> I arrived home, took a shower, and went
out to the garden, checking on the roses
that are flowering this uh
Yeah.
So,
it's my mental health program.
>> So, I might, if I may, at various uh at
various times, I might go back and forth
between 1976 and the present day, just
because you have all of this knowledge
and it helps to set us uh we're in a
time of misunderstanding and alarm, and
I think someone like you who can guide
us through all of that and separate out
the facts, it's really valuable.
>> Hopefully, I can remember everything.
Yeah.
>> I'm not worried about that. May I begin
by
asking you to use your 50-year knowledge
of this virus that we now know as Ebola,
and take us back to the moment that you
encountered it for the first time, when
you saw an image of it in your lab in
Antwerp. What went through your mind?
>> Well, first of all, I was still in
training and
in virology. I was 27 years old, just 2
years after graduating from medical
school,
where my professors had told me no
future in infectious diseases. So, a boy
like you should not go into infectious
diseases, but
I was passionate about it.
The The real defining moment was when we
saw a virus under the electron
microscope.
In these days,
virology and isolating viruses was a bit
like cooking, which I liked a lot.
And you put it on cells, you injected in
mice and so on, and then you wait, and
then you see something. Today, it's all
genetic,
you know, identification and so on, and
goes very fast. But the defining moment
was really to see it under the electron
microscope. And I said I was part of a
team. It's It's not just me.
And
what we saw was like a bit more like
spaghetti or worms or so. Viruses are
usually spheres, round or square.
And here we had like Yeah, I call it
spaghetti.
And
we needed to think
What is this?
And we needed to look into an atlas.
This was before
you know, we could
go on the internet and then and see it
all.
And there was only one other virus that
had the same morphology, the same shape,
and that is Marburg virus, which had
caused a deadly epidemic in the city of
Marburg among people who are
you know, producing polio vaccine.
And then we got a bit worried because
that's high mortality.
And um
we couldn't take it further. Uh we got
the news from the WHO that uh we should
forward it to the only
um
laboratory in the world, a civil
laboratory that was allowed to work with
very deadly viruses. And that was at the
Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta,
Georgia in the US.
The three other so-called P4
laboratories were all military
laboratories preparing for biological
warfare in the Soviet Union, in the UK,
and in the US. It also tells you a bit
of a story of the time, you know?
Um but that was very exciting and I was,
you know, 27. I said, "Oh my goodness,
you know, a new virus." But my immediate
thought was actually what does it do to
people?
You know, how's it transmitted?
>> So that's the moment, that's the start
of this 50-year journey. But I want to
ask one more thing before we come to the
present outbreak. And that is, why had
your professor said to you that there
was no future in infectious diseases?
What was the thinking at that time in
the '70s?
>> Yeah, this was when I graduated in
in 1974,
and it was the prevailing um
you know, wisdom.
Uh don't we have antibiotics? Don't we
have vaccines? Don't we have hygiene,
clean water, and all that? So it's all
under control. And today we know, of
course, that that's not the case. Two
years later, new virus. There was a lot
of optimism about that infectious
diseases were on you know,
uh were gone. But not only was there
Ebola,
which was actually, frankly, a small
outbreak, but then came HIV, which has
killed more people than even COVID, you
know, in the meantime.
>> Which I think is your second
life-changing moment. But I I want to
take you right to the present day
because there's so much about this
outbreak that we are learning, and
there's a lot of distrust, there's a lot
of misunderstanding. So help us to
understand it. First of all, this
particular strain, where do you think it
emerged from?
>> Well, what we know is that most of
these, if not all, these so-called
emerging infections, they're what we
call zoonoses. In other words, they come
from other animals and they they live
happily with animals. In this case, we
assume it's
you know, it's about some kind of bats.
Um
and it started actually in an
extraordinary way in 1976 because
um there was there were two outbreaks of
Ebola independently, one in what was
then called Zaire, the equator, now the
Democratic Republic of Congo, and
another one in South Sudan.
Independent from each other.
And today we know that that's the Sudan
strain and the Zaire strain. And both
came from an animal that infected a
human being and then
you know, it was transmitted. And the
same is actually true for HIV, it came
from chimpanzees. And when we have these
deadly
influenza epidemics, the flu comes from
animals.
So, that's why I think we will always
see it uh unless we want to eradicate
all bats in the world. What we can
prevent though is that they give rise to
a big outbreak and a big epidemic. And
that's what's happening now.
>> And this particular strain is the
Bundibugyo strain. And as it happens,
there there is a large colony of fruit
bats right outside the town that's
considered the epicenter. The key thing
about this strain is that it's different
from the one in 2014 that caused
thousands of deaths and for which there
are vaccines and there are treatments
approved.
>> Yeah, so Ebola has like it is nearly
let's call it a family and there are
five different strains. And the most
common one is so-called Zaire after the
country where it first happened in
Sudan. And this Bundibugyo has only
caused two fairly small outbreaks. It's
actually a town
on in Uganda on the border with the
Democratic Republic of Congo.
And um
so it is
yeah, a bit of a curiosum and we we
didn't expect that this would give rise
to what we see now. Um what's very very
important is that the vaccines that we
have against um Ebola is they're only
active against Zaire because that's the
most prevailing one. There's some
therapies that were developed, but there
was really not a strong reason to
develop a vaccine specifically for this
Bundibugyo that then suddenly appeared.
And that's also one of the reasons that
it took quite a long time to identify
and to diagnose that this was Ebola
because the diagnostic tests also don't
work against this um you know, this new
strain. Which it's it's was
from 2007, eh? So it's
not so new.
>> Two months I think before it was
actually identified as a strain of
Ebola.
How contagious is it? Because this is
one of the key things that really alarms
people, especially when they look at the
evidence that there is on fatalities and
the number of fatalities per cases.
>> It's a very dangerous virus, but it's
not a very contagious virus. This is not
Corona. This is not COVID that you can
get by sitting on the bus with someone
who has it. Um you really need close
contact.
Um and you need to be exposed to body
fluids. That is why
it's household contacts.
Often the women who care for someone, a
a child or an adult with uh you know,
with Ebola. It's health care workers.
Let's not forget in uh 2014 when there
was the biggest outbreak that we know in
West Africa, uh it killed 1,500 health
care workers,
doctors, nurses, laboratory workers, and
so on, because they all have close
contact. And then, and that's more
cultural, uh in the uh in Central
Africa, funerals are also a very
dangerous moment because people say
goodbye, adieu,
to their loved ones by touching them, by
hugging them uh before they're kind of
buried. And that's also gives rise to
explosion. But so it's you need close
contact. That's why I'm not concerned
that this would become a pandemic, you
know, because that's reserved for,
you know, for respiratory transmission
or for sexual transmission, as we see
with HIV.
>> Interesting. It's so useful for you to
separate out dangerous
but not contagious or not so contagious
because to many people those two things
are just inextricably linked. So, just
so I understand that a bit more, if you
got off a plane and you discover that
the person you'd been sitting next to on
that plane had Ebola, how frightened
would you be?
>> I would be worried, of course, um
but um
unless you touch the person, the risk is
is very close to zero. But you don't
want to take a risk because the what we
call case fatality rate that chance that
you die when you have it is pretty high.
I mean,
in 1976, it was 90%. Nine out of 10. Um
in the previous outbreaks with
uh Bougouyabou was about 30%. I mean, we
say it's low, but frankly, one out of
three died. Um so, I think you as you
say, you can't get it on the tube or in
the bus
uh in in general.
>> So, what do you think of travel
restrictions, which are starting to come
in, notably by the United States?
>> Well, not only in our United States.
Let's put it this way. Depends how
you're applying it. I mean, I think that
what makes sense is to test uh people
for fever.
You know, and if you're in a neighboring
country, like if you're in Uganda, then
people who come from uh the area with
plenty of cases, yeah, you would screen
everybody for fever. Because another
thing with uh Ebola is that
it's really people are con- contagious
when they're symptomatic.
With some exceptions later on. So, I
would say you have to be careful. Uh I
would indeed uh do uh
screening for fever and all that from
everybody who's coming.
But a com- complete uh restriction, I
think, is really overkill. And actually,
the World Health Organization um
recommends against it.
>> But I think you do worry about the
spread within big cities because
human beings living close together,
there's just much more potential for um
for contamination.
>> Yeah.
Exactly. I mean, let's not forget the
area where this is happening
um is very densely populated, even by
African standards. And then, you know,
uh people are very poor. So, they live
with many in uh in the same room. But
the worst case scenario for me is that
it's in an area with extremely high
uh insecurity with armed struggle, with
a lot of violence, um which means that
people will
Yeah, cuz get close to each other. You
know, you can't move uh as you want. And
that means also that uh controlling it
through contact tracing and all that is
difficult. Because what do you do in
terms of Ebola? One, you you try to
uh identify, to isolate as soon as
possible someone who's infected. So,
from the moment that they're having
fever, headache, and so on. And it
starts like a bit like a flu, you know,
nothing specific. And although it's a
hemorrhagic fever at the end, it can you
can start bleeding from your nose and
so. But so, identify someone who um you
know, has it. And immediately isolate
that person, and then also isolate all
the contacts of that person. In the
household, or if they are you know, um
uh
traveled or gone to a funeral or
whatever, isolate people.
Now, that's not
very fun. And and and as we know from
COVID also,
that's not something people uh you know,
appreciate. But it it is really
as primitive as that. And then you try
to offer the best possible
treatment, supportive treatment to
someone with Ebola.
And we know that if you can provide a
good therapy, mortality will go down. In
2024,
in Rwanda, they had a an outbreak of
Marburg virus, a cousin, let's say, from
Ebola. High mortality. They brought it
down to about 20%
and we say only, I shouldn't say only,
but it's a major decrease because in
Rwanda, they could provide intensive
care and so. But that is not available
in where we have Ebola now. It's such a
poor area with very poor health
facilities.
>> Can I tell you the moment, Peter, in the
last few days that I think really
brought home to me the
um
the inequality and the indignity that is
an aspect of this. It's when I read a
piece in the New York Times, and Ebola's
in the headlines, and yet this reporter,
Declan Walsh, who went to the epicenter
of this outbreak, describes going to a
hospital, seeing a body um covered by a
thin sheet, highly contagious, yet
hardly anyone in the ward was protected.
He writes, "In the next ward lay the
hospital's laboratory technician, also
sick. Seven other the hospital workers
already died from suspected Ebola. The
most rudimentary equipment was in
dangerously short supply. Tests,
protective suits, goggles, masks, even
drinking water. This shocked me because
I guess I imagined that help had been
sent or sufficient help to an area
affected by Ebola to this extent. And
yet you read that and realize it's not
the case.
>> Yeah, I read the same article and also
I've seen it and
I really literally think every day about
the people who live there. Their health
conditions were already the basis is
really is already pretty awful.
Um, you know, just when you think of
women giving birth, the the level of um,
mat- maternal mortality is enormous uh,
because there are no decent uh, health
facilities. So Ebola is not their only
problem. It's malaria that is killing
uh, people, HIV, TB,
um,
you know, and so and in addition then we
have Ebola. And what does Ebola do? It's
not only killing the people who are
infected, but it actually paralyzes the
whole health care system because just
imagine you're a health care worker.
You know, and you have Ebola patients in
your hospital.
That means that anybody you touch can
mean for you the death sentence. Um,
and there so that means that all regular
health care is actually pretty much
stopped. And that in an area where
people are already suffering not only
from poor health care
and health uh, conditions, but also
because of the violence of all kinds
including enormous sexual violence
against women.
>> Today, how far are we do you think from
a vaccine for this strain of Ebola?
>> Yeah, the first thing is to see whether
the uh, the available vaccine uh,
actually offers at least some
protection.
>> Oh, the one for the other strain, you
mean?
>> For the other strain, yes. It's a a
vaccine made against the so-called Zaire
strain, and we know that works. So,
we're lucky. And that's only uh you
know, since the West Africa outbreak in
2014 that we know that that works.
That's the first thing to do. You find
out what you have already in hand. But
then there is another race going on to
develop new vaccines
uh against the
uh the Bundibugyo strain. But that's
going to take time. I mean, let's say 6
months. That's by the end of the year.
But and I'm not a pessimist at all, but
I'm afraid that this
outbreak will go on for quite a while.
Um
probably beyond the end of this year.
And the reason is we've seen it before
in that region.
Uh also with a lot of violence, with
attacks of
uh care centers. And now it is security
situation is much worse than uh during
the previous outbreak in uh 2018.
>> How many countries in the region do you
think will be engulfed by this by the
end of the year?
>> Well, I think that definitely Uganda has
already some cases, but they've been
doing a good job in isolation and so on.
I I'm the most concerned about of course
DRC, the Congo, Uganda,
and South Sudan, which also has a lot of
insecurity, very poor health conditions,
very poor people.
Rwanda, I think they're um
maybe at risk, and Burundi. I think
these are the countries that are
immediate risk for it. And one thing
that is uh I think we should not
uh underestimate is that there are no
really outstanding world-class teams in
Africa who can deal with it. Uh and
that's something that did not exist
before. So, the capacity is there, but
the means are not there. We need to
really support them.
>> And the fact that you think it's worth
trying the other the the vaccines for
the other strain to to try and give
people some protection. What are stocks
of that like? How much of a challenge
would it be to
mass vaccinate the key region in the DRC
for starters?
>> Gavi, the
vaccine alliance, has quite a big stock
of I don't know the numbers, but it's
tens of thousands.
Um and the way to deal with this is not
to vaccinate everybody, but what we call
ring vaccination. So,
what does it mean? It's I have it Ebola,
so everybody around me will be
vaccinated because these are the people
at high risk. And so, what they're
starting to do is to vaccinate
all health care workers and let's say
frontline workers, people who deal with
funerals, burials, and so on. Um
and then um the family members and so
on.
So, that's the
that's a matter of logistics now.
Frankly, um this is the biggest
challenge. Getting the
supplies there, also the protective
equipment.
>> You were one of those people at the
heart of an outbreak when you went to
what was then Zaire in 1976 after seeing
the virus in the lab in Antwerp.
Um how much did you think about becoming
infected yourself?
>> Well, first I was 27. I was very
excited. I'd never been to Africa. I'd
never
um
you know, investigate an outbreak. The
first challenge we had is that this is a
new virus, completely unknown, and we
had no clue how this is transmitted. Is
it mosquitoes, which was my biggest
worry,
um because how do you protect yourself?
Um is it water? Is it food? Is it
touching someone?
Uh you know, um is it blood? Is it sex?
I mean, all the ways that viruses um
transmitted. But, we found out in within
48 hours that it must be close contact.
But what do you do then?
We were protecting our eyes. I I used a
motorbike goggles because that they're
very close.
A mask for mouth and nose and then
gloves. But nothing like what they use
now in terms of
you know, so called protective
equipment.
It just wasn't there. But we were
careful but on the other hand I drew
blood, I touched patients and uh um
yeah, we couldn't do much for them.
>> How did you discover in 48 hours how it
was transmitted? Because
I mean this is 50 years ago in a really
challenged part of the world even more
challenged than it is today.
>> Oh yeah, there was definitely no AI to
tell us what it would be. Uh not even
mobile phones.
Um so what do you ask yourself uh three
questions when you're in front of a an
epidemic and and that is time, place and
person. In this case we said when did
they die and then we see and it goes up
and up and up it's an epidemic.
And then we saw it was going down. Okay,
very interesting. Then you ask okay,
when when did it go down and then it
turned out that when the hospital was
basically closed. 11 out of 17 hospital
workers had died. Uh secondly uh
place.
We mapped it out and we saw that the
closer you live to the hospital the more
likely that you you have it. And thirdly
most important, who? Person. And so you
map it out by age and sex. It's as
simple as that.
And uh you What did we see? One, very
few children were
uh died and were infected. Okay, that's
that it makes it very unlikely that this
is
um
you know, uh mosquitoes or insects or
that it's water or so like because why
would children be safe? And secondly we
found that there were twice as many
women between 18 and
30 who
died than men.
And since we were a bunch of men, it
took us 24 hours to find out what's the
difference between men and women. Of
course, women can get pregnant at that
age.
And then and then you start and you say,
"Oh, okay.
Were they pregnant?" And indeed were
the excess of women were pregnant women
or women who had just delivered and they
had been at the hospital. So, everything
pointed to the hospital. It's not really
rocket science and then you use your
brain and you talk to people. I also
asked in the villages, "How do you think
that it's
transmitted?" And you know, it's more
like journalism,
a bit of detective story. And it's only
afterwards that you prove it to
scientifically, but we needed an answer
very, very fast and we found it there
with a high level of
>> I hadn't really thought about the links
between my work and yours, but I I see
them now.
>> Oh, yes.
Definitely, you know, I Yeah, I
hesitated between a journalism or
detective or something like this,
epidemiology.
>> I And I think one of the
one of the sad moments, when you wrote
about it in your book, I you realized
that these very well-meaning nuns who
had seen fellow nuns die from this
mystery virus,
you were the one who you and your team
who realized that inadvertently through
the syringes they were using in that
hospital, they were inadvertently
spreading the virus and passing it from
one woman to another.
>> This pregnant women who had gone to an
antenatal clinic
that the mortality was very high.
But then it took a while to find out
that there were only three syringes
and that they were
not sterilized only at the end of the
day and then,
you know, this is the most effective way
of transmitting a virus.
You inject it directly into another
person. And yeah, and that was yeah, the
women I'm Flemish, so I could speak in
Flemish dialect into them and then
uh
it it was tragic.
>> Yeah, we live in an age of
vaccine hesitancy and distrust sometimes
in conventional medicine. Those local
people back then who started to fear the
hospital in that particular context,
they were right.
>> They were absolutely right. They And
that's what they told me when I went
into the villages and talked to people
and
um they said they said there's something
wrong at that hospital. That's why we
stopped going there. But you mentioned
something that is now extremely
um
important and is added to violence uh in
in the region and that is the lack of
trust amplified by social media, uh
conspiracy theories. Um in the last
epidemic in in the region, they already
burned several um
care uh
facilities. Already two have been burned
also now. And um and so on the one hand,
I understand it. I mean,
you know, just imagine you have Ebola,
you are put in isolation and you die in
isolation and then
all your family sees is a plastic bag.
Um and particularly in a culture where
ancestors are so important, where saying
farewell to the ancestors uh is really
extremely uh important as part of life.
And then that's amplified that the
mistrust by social media, which did not
exist uh you know, certainly not 50
years ago. And that's why today is far
more complicated than before. We have
better tools.
Hopefully we'll have a vaccine. We have
maybe treatment.
But um
we also have the epidemic of
misinformation. And and that means that
when we deal with epidemic, we also have
to invest in
um in social media, in the uh in
influencers. Before we would talk to the
traditional leaders, religious leaders,
and people would listen to them.
Uh that's still the case, but uh not
with young people.
>> There are
people, companies, universities working
on a vaccine right now, but I wonder if
you have a message to the pharmaceutical
industry more widely given that today
it's clear how much money there is to be
made from weight loss drugs. And there
was a a study out the other day that
said that obesity drugs have displaced
oncology drugs as the largest
contributor to the industry's pipeline
value. That's happened for the first
time in more than a decade.
What's What's your message to the
industry? Not Not to forget these needs?
>> Well, my message is not only to the
industry, but also to um
governments and public authorities. We
really need to invest in vaccines, but
also uh drugs against viruses, antiviral
drugs
um that we will need when there's the
next epidemic. Because what we now see
is this cycle of um Okay, there's a new
virus or a new epidemic, panic. And then
we scramble in and there's money and we
will have, I'm quite optimistic, some
vaccines. And then we forget.
You know, think of uh COVID. Um we
forgot them. And I psychologically, I
understand you you don't want to
remember all the time all the the bad
things that happened. But uh as a public
authority, we can't do that. So, we need
to continue to invest in preparedness.
Um
and that needs industry.
Um and you know, there is what we could
call the no market incentives uh or
making a vaccine against uh boogie
boogie virus. I mean, that requires
public uh money. Fortunately for
vaccines, we have CEPI, Coalition for
Epidemic Preparedness Innovation. Um,
and that's working. And
like in the European Union now, we have
HERA. There are now mechanisms which we
did not have before.
But
keeping that on the political agenda is
quite a challenge. It's really bad that
we wait from the when there's another
crisis
to wake up again. And then, you know,
and then we all join forces as we did
for COVID. Um,
but we need to continue to invest in
this, absolutely.
>> I have been thinking about the link to
COVID and the experience of COVID and
how people perceive an outbreak of Ebola
like this. Because clearly science has
moved on
and the progress made during COVID is
playing a role right now. AI is playing
a role in the discovery of therapeutics.
Um, but also people are triggered by
COVID. If they think lockdowns were an
overreaction or there was
misinformation, then they,
you know, revert to those perceptions
and that's the lens through which they
see something like this.
>> Yeah, it's true.
That COVID was
collectively a quite traumatic
experience. I had it myself. I was even
in the intensive care and so on. So, um,
for once the virus got me also.
Um, but
fortunately, I'm well. Collectively, I
think
on the one hand, you can say
it's a triumph of science, you know,
that we had a vaccine so fast and that
saved
millions and millions of life. On the
other hand, there's a group of people
that believe that all this was a
conspiracy, that it didn't happen. Um,
and
and and this is, I would say, a
relatively new phenomenon because it can
be it's accelerated by social media.
AI will make it even more effective.
and for me the big lesson is that we
need to listen really to people. We need
to communicate. It's not as many
scientists think a matter of give more
information. It's often about something
else. Because I don't trust the state
and that's where we we need also the
science of misinformation and develop
not only vaccines against viruses but
maybe vaccines against this
misinformation if I may use that term. A
plus we should not be naive also. Some
of these misinformation
you know campaigns and so they can be
you know organized by foreign powers and
all that. So
it is a world that we're in that
where we need to take these things very
seriously because they are there to
undermine our societal resilience and
cohesion. And and without that you can't
deal with epidemics.
>> You had long COVID I think. It lasted
quite a few months. There are doctors
today who don't really believe that such
a thing exists.
>> Well, I they can call me but no no the
long COVID really exists. I mean I could
not cross the street. I was living then
in in London
and and we were living in one of these
houses. The bedroom was on the third
floor so I slept downstairs. I could not
make I know no you're it it is it's very
well documented now.
I'm lucky that I'm I can run 10
kilometers no problem. Some people for
years they they're suffering. And
fortunately there's quite some research
going on now but we still haven't found
exactly how to treat it. It may be a
mixture of other things. But I'm
optimistic that thanks to the
investments in dealing with long COVID
we will also hopefully find treatments
and a way to
you know to manage people who have this
kind of chronic fatigue syndrome due to
other viruses.
>> Do you think that when you got COVID
yourself and got it badly, did it change
something in your own perception of or
relationship with viruses after so many
years of having been in contact with
pathogens?
>> Yes, actually, um one I was at some
point
scared to die, that's one thing, but it
made me realize that um
you know, we're all vulnerable.
Um it can happen to anybody.
And um
it made me also
uh more
how to say, interest not only in the
virus, but also in the people.
And uh
and certainly um I mean, I'm
privileged because we were living in
London and the health care is there and
so on. But uh
going back to where we have Ebola,
there is no safety net. It's a lesson in
in humility and um yeah, we are human
beings
at the end of the day.
>> And having done detective work on more
than one virus, what is left for you to
solve? Do you still have a burning
scientific desire or a
another problem that you you just are
longing to get to grips with fully?
>> I'm 77. Um
so, I you know, supporting young people
to take it on, new ideas.
Uh they come up with the digital stuff
and AI and so on that can
make it all more um
yeah, um
efficient and faster to solve problems.
Um I'm now particularly interested in
the societal aspects, but I'm not
looking for another vi- I mean, when you
look at it, serendipity has been a a
major element in my life, you know,
Ebola. Why did we isolate Ebola in
Antwerp in Belgium? Because in these
days in Zaire, it was not possible to
isolate the virus. Today, they can do
sequencing, they do it in you know in no
time and that gives me also a lot of
satisfaction that there is progress
although sometimes you wonder in the
world but on the field of
pandemic control and so on we we made
fantastic progress. Professor Peter Piot
thank you very much. Thank you Michelle.
Good to talk.